I don't think the right spot-on critique
of kamla is that she's a communist right
the policies she's advocated for in the
past certainly would vindicate that
characterization she favors taxes on
unrealized capital gains single-payer
Health Care System she has favored bans
on fracking bans on offshore drilling
but as you say right now sincerely or
not those are not the views that she's
espousing at the moment so it's it's
less that she is a communist or a
socialist I think that that gives her
the credit of being an ideologue when in
fact it misses the point she's just
another Cog in the system we're not
running against a candidate we're
running against a
[Music]
machine hello everybody
so what I did today was the culmination
or at least the culmination for now of a
sequence of talks that I've had with VI
ramaswami who many of you know perhaps
the majority of you that he was a a
contender on the presidential circuit on
the Republican side uh young man who
came really as an unknown into the race
although he had quite a substantial
history of accomplishment behind him and
one of the things we've done with the
podcast is track his progress um both as
a candidate and also as a person across
the expanse of the presidential circuit
and that's been extremely interesting
and Illuminating and he was quite
successful and one of the consequences
of that is appears to be the case that
he's entered the close circle of the
fundamental Contender for the presidency
now Donald Trump and so what did we do
in this discussion well one of the
consequences of Ramis Swami's Journey
has been the modification and
specification of his political and
philosophical views and he's written a
new book called truths the future of
Amer America first which Launches on
September 24th and so we walked through
that we walked through the chapters uh
his which detail out his attempt to put
forward something like a conservative
Vision rather than the more standard
conservative objections to the
Revolutionary vision of the progressives
and so we discussed his proposition that
uh a state that's functional and a
psyche that's functional for that matter
has to be predicated on allegiance to a
higher power a higher authority God is
real is one of the uh insistences of his
uh chapters in in in the new book truths
that there are two Sexes we discussed
the climate change hoax and what exactly
it means that it's ho a hoax we talked
about the value of subsidiary identity
and responsibility with regards to the
nuclear family and the nation the
Constitutional nation state and as a
source of abiding identity um and then
we walked through as well uh Ramis
Swami's analysis of the current state of
the Trump candidacy the surprising entry
of RFK at telsey gabard and Elon Musk
onto the stage in the last few weeks
which is really a revolutionary
development and his we got his thoughts
about how that what that might imply and
how a trump presidency might conduct it
itself in the as it unfolds across the
months post elction so join us for all
that hello Mr ramaswami it's good to see
you again I I guess we have two streams
of conversation to undertake today the
first is pertains directly to a new book
that you're releasing on September 24th
truths the future of America first and I
think we'll use that as a springboard
for a more General discussion one of the
agre ments we made about a year ago was
that you would check in with regular
updates with regards to the progression
of your presidential candidacy which has
come to an end but there's many things
to discuss with regard to its conclusion
and to everything you've learned into
what the future pathway looks like let's
say in a trump Administration what role
you might play in that or and and how
you and how you construe that in general
but let's start with your let's start
with your book tell us about truths the
future of America First yeah so it's one
of the things and it's great to see you
again by the way because we have most
kept that pledge and I think it's been
yeah it's been a fun forcing function
for me to also in conversations like
this to take some space and reflect on
what has been still a a lifechanging
journey and you I've enjoyed each of
these times when been able to check in
and to give myself that space has been
useful this book was one of the things
that gave me that occasion for
reflection as well so I left the
campaign at the start of this year and
one of the core tenants of my campaign
the the slogan was truth actually but it
caused me to reflect more deeply on okay
what what did that actually mean and
what are the stakes for the future of
this movement that I ran my presidential
campaign as part of the America first
movement what is the future of that
movement and how does it relate to the
pursuit of Truth and so that's what this
book is about it goes through 10 simple
hard truths and I can tell you what some
of those are but it's a little bit
different than the books that I've
written in the past I wrote woke Inc
which actually was our first basis to
get to know one another that first book
and I've written this is my fourth book
I've written in the last three years but
this one's different and that it's not
actually an academic exposition of any
kind it doesn't pretend to be it's
designed to equip people with the kinds
of points they can use in dinner table
talking point conversation with friends
on the left who they otherwise may not
be interacting with because I think one
of the premises of the book is not just
the content of it but the methodology of
how we get our country back I think is
going to be through more open dialogue
that we're not having amongst even
friends and even family members for whom
certain cultural or political topics
have gone beyond the pale and so each
chapter ends with five hard points or
facts that you took away from that
chapter I've never written a book that
had that type of character to it as
opposed to maybe more you know intellect
ual or academic bent but I think that
this actually may be the most useful of
the books that I will have written I
hope because it would arm a lot of
everyday citizens who agree with the
points that I make in the book but may
not have been able to distill them in
ways that allow them to talk to their
friends on the left or friends who are
outside of political interest to be able
to start the conversations at the dinner
table that were otherwise not having so
it's not quite a how-to book but it does
have an element of guiding people to
have difficult conversation
with friends and I think that's a
crucial part of this with friends who
they otherwise might have experienced
distance with that's part of what this
book hopes to accomplish as well can we
walk through some of those truths do you
want to detail some of them out so that
people have a more clear understanding
of what it is and also explain to us why
you selected and focused on those yeah
absolutely so the first one is God is
real and I'll go kind of go straight
down the list of some of these God is
real yeah do that do do that there are
two
genders the climate change agenda is a
hoax that's an adaptation of what I used
in my campaign that fossil fuels are a
requirement for human
Prosperity another one is that reverse
racism is racism another is that an open
border is not a border another is that
in a democracy the people we elect to
run the government ought to be the ones
who actually run the government or as I
phrase it in the book there are three
branches of government in the United
States not four that's actually a
probably one of the most important
chapters of the book albeit the one that
gets the most technical another one is
that nationalism isn't a bad word and
that's a chapter whose thesis is that
the elected leaders of a Nation
including the United States owe their
first moral duty to the citizens of
their Nation so that explores I think a
lot of the themes relating to the future
of America First there's a chapter
entitled facts are not
conspiracies and you know again these
truths are written in the chapter that
follows that is the US Constitution is
the strongest and greatest guarantor of
freedom in human
history another chapter explores the
importance of the nuclear family I make
the claim in the book that the nuclear
family is the greatest form of
governance known to mankind so it gives
you a sense for the kinds of truths that
I expose in this book They're the kinds
of things that had I said these things
in the 19 90s when I grew up in the
American Midwest I would have advised
you to not buy this book because they
would have been too obvious right the
things that are so obvious they would
have been benal to say the irony is now
in the year 2024 many of those
statements are controversial for the for
the same reasons that they were benal 30
years ago and I think it is when the
obvious becomes controversial that is
really a reminder of How Far We've
Fallen as a country but I think that
part of the approach the book isn't to
be angry about it but to offer let's
just take the climate change agenda as a
hoax chapter for example that's one that
I think will and already amongst the
people who have had these conversations
does make a lot of people upset when
they hear that framing are you claiming
the climate change or the idea of it is
hoax no I say the climate change agenda
is a hoax because whether climate change
is real or not is the wrong question and
the chapter I think if I may say so you
know go somewhat logically through not
independently conducted research I'm not
a climate scientist but Amal
in the the research of a lot of people
who have made this their life's work to
go through the different questions
underlying climate change right first of
all are Global surface temperatures
going up that's a reasonable question to
ask the answer appears to be yes is that
related to man-made causes there's
evidence suggesting that the answer to
that question may be asked but now that
we've gotten that out of the way is
there clear evidence or any evidence to
suggest that that would propose an
existential risk to mankind or the
future of humanity and that's where I
believe the answer is no against the
backdrop of hard facts that the book
exposes from you know other researchers
that have highlighted folks you've
talked to even Bjorn lomberg for example
has highlighted eight times as many
people die from cold temperatures as
warm ones well then how do we synthesize
that to a dinner table conversation that
somebody's able to have with their
friends who believe that climate change
is the single most important issue that
needs to be addressed while not being a
denier of the fact that Global surface
temperatures are going up because they
are but getting to the heart of the
matter of whether that actually has an
adverse impact on the future of humanity
so that's the kind of thing I try to do
chapter by chapter in the book right
that's part of that is a problem I mean
you know we've been enjoined repeatedly
over the past years to defer to the
experts but that difference presupposes
that any given set of facts immediately
displays for your perusal a set of
policies that should be intelligently
implemented and part of the problem with
that hypothesis is well there's many
problems with it but one of the major
ones is balance of risk let's say I mean
one of the things that we did that was
so catastrophic in our covid Panic was
to
prioritize um a small potential
increment in health over every other
possible concern short and long term and
what would you say abdicate any
political respon responsibility
whatsoever with regard to balancing
those risks and that certainly applies
on the climate side is even if there is
a risk the question is well what is the
risk precisely and what could we do to
ameliorate it and what would be the
risks of that amelioration like the
largescale transformation of the entire
industrial Enterprise is no minor
undertaking and it's not at all obvious
as you point out and even by the ipcc's
own uh recognition that that is the
primary existential threat that
confronts human beings I even on the
environmental side and so um and this is
completely independent of the reality of
climate change which I think is also
questionable and the potential danger of
carbon dioxide which in my way of
thinking has not been um convincingly
established especially given the massive
data showing that carbon dioxide
produces Global Greening especially in
semi-arid areas and that's like that's
it's an Greening increase of
20% like when I look at this data as a
scientist and I am a Scientist I think
that data point is so overwhelming 20%
increase in Greening especially in semi-
AED areas accompanied by a quite
dramatic increase in crop productivity
it's like that single data point
overshadows the significance of all the
other data points as far as I can tell
and and that's only one potential
problem okay so
you on the climate point just because
this is of near and dear to my heart as
well and it is an example of what I
strive to do in this book where you know
folks like yourself are able to go into
the actual hard data points and form
your own conclusions but for the
everyday citizen that often you know
people who have you know other callings
may not have the same background that
you do that could be a difficult thing
to do when much of what you're served up
comes through the filter intermediary
sources that actually are in many ways
bastardizing their so-called synthesis
of the underlying research so what I try
to do here is at least demarcate several
categories of questions the first you
raised is I think one many people are at
least comfortable now with broaching the
idea that okay even if climate change
represents some kind of risk is the cure
worse than the disease that's the
covid-19 analogy and and I I contend
with that but that is well Trot in
ground but one of the things I try to do
in in this book and for example in this
chapter of the book as well is to go
beyond just that well trod and accepted
trade-off debate to actually even a
deeper question of forget the cost of
intervention are we certain or do we
even have a basis to believe that a net
increase of a small amount of global
surface temperatures is indeed a bad
thing for Humanity period this
irrespective of the question of
intervention right because you have many
people say that oh we we we still need
fossil fuels we still need that and the
cost of that even though climate change
is going to be bad for Humanity the cost
of that would exceed the benefits that's
one argument that's a totally separate
argument but an important one from the
question of whether or not carbon
dioxide aided or eded increases in
global surface temperatures of under two
degrees Celsius over the course of a
century is bad or good and it turns out
there are some effects that are arguably
bad for Humanity there are other effects
which are more convincingly potentially
net positive for Humanity such as the
fact that more people die of cold
temperatures than warm ones such as the
fact that the Earth is actually covered
by more green surface areas you noted
than it was even a century ago
especially in semi-arid areas as you're
right to note and then there's the
deeper question of going even Upstream
of that so are we sure this is net bad
for Humanity then there's the question
of are we even sure that carbon dioxide
is even the cause of the said phenomenon
in the first place when it's actually a
much smaller percentage of the
atmosphere when we have relatively low
levels of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere relative to most of Earth's
history those are also deeper questions
on the underlying science to ask and so
I I find in many of these questions we
could talk about the Border debate we
could talk about a number of the other
issues even in the gender ideology
debates where I think conservatives
often will conflate those different
questions because we we know in our gut
what the right answer is what the truth
is but sometimes if our goal is to bring
as I as my goal here is friends at the
dinner table along we can actually do
better by understanding which of those
strands of particular audience on the
other side would find most persuasive or
is most receptive to and actually use
that rather than the amalgam of of the
general point that sometimes we make in
our political
discourse so we could start by talking
about
[Music]
depression depressed people are sad and
frustrated and disappointed they tend to
feel all negative emotions
simultaneously in a manner that's
paralyzing depression is fundamentally a
biochemical disorder one of the things I
tried to determine as a good behaviorist
was whether the person who was suffering
was suffering because they were ill in
the strictly physiological sense or
whether they were suffering from the
cumulative micro and macro catastrophes
of
[Music]
Life the probability that tossing an
anti-depressant into the mix is all of a
sudden going to fix your life that are
absolutely catastrophically out of order
is zero the more unstable your life is
the less serotonin your brain produces
and that makes you hyp sensitive to
negative emotion and suppresses positive
emotion you take the problem I'm
suffering and then you think well why
are you suffering it's exposure therapy
and then you can practice encountering
the obstacles that are stopping you and
it'll make you braver and it'll help you
deal with your problems voluntary
confrontation with the forces of
darkness and chaos is the fundamental
story of
[Music]
life right right so it's it's partly a
guide to civil political dialogue and I
guess I'm curious too um you know why
you picked the topics you picked so I'm
going to walk through some of them in in
in some detail because I think that's a
useful exercise I mean the first one you
picked is really quite
um what would you say well you couldn't
have picked a more contentious or deeper
opening Salvo than your Proclamation
that God is real and so let let me ask
you this question in a relatively
complicated way so I've written a new
book um called we who rest with God
which will be out in mid November and
one of the things I've noted about the
culture War say that's reigning between
the atheists and the Believers which is
an element of the culture War uh is that
the phenomenon that we're discussing is
illd defined right I mean Dawkins for
example who's probably the most famous
living uh blatant atheist who's making a
moral case for atheism know he
parodies religious belief especially of
the judeo-christian type as uh worship
of the you know big daddy in the sky
which is virally a quote from him the
sky Daddy and part of the problem with
that formulation is that it's it's
simply not true like the the the
characterization of the Divine in the
Old and New Testaments and this is also
true of many literatures pertaining to
the domain of religious phenomenology is
much more sophisticated than that it's
not easily pared except in the manner
that you can take an oversimplification
of any complex belief and parody it and
so the book I wrote is a walkthrough of
the multiple characterizations of the
Divine in the standard Western Canon and
I'm formulating this this way for a very
particular reason with regard to you so
because because you start with your
chapter about the reality of God um the
the essential claim in the western
Cannon is that there's a Unity
underlying all things so you could think
about that for example on the positive
side as the unity of beauty and Truth
and Love that there's a Unity that
underlies all things that it's an that
it's an active process that unity and
not merely a static State and that it's
the kind of unity that is related to you
in a manner that's best characterized as
a relationship and I I think those are
the now it's it's also a sacrificial
relationship which which has certain
implications but that's the basic
argument and you know the
counterargument is that there is no
underlying Unity that the virtues and
the goods do not sum
into something that's commensurate and
that you have no relationship whatsoever
between you and the infinite and like I
don't find those contrary hypotheses
particularly credible you know are like
for example do we believe that there's
no Unity underlying say the
manifestations of Truth and Beauty And
Justice all the things that we consider
positive virtues and good are they not
United under some rubric that
approximates the good as such and are we
not in some sort of relationship with
that good I mean it's it's it's very
dangerous to occupy to to what put
forward the contrary suppositions it
ends up tilting people in a nihilistic
direction or a hedonistic direction or
it tempts them to worship power as an
alternative uniting Spirit let's say so
anyways that's how I've been
conceptualizing the same question I'm
curious about why you found it necessary
and Des desirable to open your argument
with this proposition that God is real
what do you mean by that yeah well I
found it necessary because I think it's
the most important of all I found it
desirable in part because I was able to
bring a dimension to this that is maybe
complimentary to the one that it sounds
like you're bringing in your upcoming
book and I will use that as a chance to
say the only thing that I would uh not
take issue with but expand on what you
just said is that I don't think that
that's actually limited to the Western
philosophical worldview or or to or to
even the judeo-christian tradition and
and so so the reason I thought it was
desirable for me to bring to bear here
is I'm actually a religious Hindu and I
believe in exactly in exactly the
worldview that you just described that
sense of unity that rests actually at
the heart of even the Hindu worldview
it's known as the non-dualistic
worldview it's a philosophy that says
the dualism the separation between man
and the Supreme Being the separation
between truth and Beauty non-dualism
rejects the exist
of that distinction and you know I think
how to describe Hinduism is it's the
reconciliation of man with the Supreme
Being and his creator and I think that
that is something that is a Common
Thread through nearly all major all
major world religions and I think that
the Common Thread that that debate this
debate about between the atheist and the
person of faith in each of those
religious traditions and cultural
backgrounds and backdrops where that
debate has taken place I think falls
into the Trap of believing that because
you can't understand something that that
other thing no longer exists which is
actually a denial of the entire history
of science as well right so so the idea
that your body is composed of cells that
themselves contain contain nucleic acids
that all that offer the blueprint for
your genetic makeup the fact that you
couldn't see that does not deny its
actual truth and I think that's the form
of AR argument that I see with the
atheist not only in the American setting
but really for all of Western
philosophical religious history but it
turns out even if you look to ancient
arguments in places like India for
people who had a non-dualistic worldview
you could call it a Hindu worldview of
believing that there is a Supreme Being
that resides and is Unified with each
man the fact that you can't see that or
access that is not a valid argument on
its own to deny its actual truth well
let's let's look at that a minute from
the scientific perspective you know
because there's actually it seems to me
that one of the prerequisites the
presuppositions of formal science is at
least the implicit recognition of
something like a Transcendent Unity so
and here's what I mean by that it's like
any good scientist knows that his or her
theories are insufficient right that our
grip the grip that our knowledge has on
the world is inadequate now what that
implies is that there is a world that's
a Unity outside of our conceptualization
right so that's a belief in a
Transcendent reality so what you're
doing when you do science is that you're
subjecting your hypothesis to revision
by the facts of the Transcendent Unity
right you you put your hypothesis up for
testing against the manner in which the
real but as of yet unknown world will
manifest itself and so you have to
presume that there is a reality beyond
your presuppositions and not only that
you have to presume that that reality is
intelligible and that making the effort
to make it intelligible is actually
beneficial and good because and it could
be destructive I mean you can discover
things that are destructive but the
scientific mindset is PR ated on the
idea that the expansion of our knowledge
in the direction of this Transcendent
transcendental Unity is actually a net
moral good because otherwise science
would be an evil Enterprise and so I it
seems to me and I make this case in this
book too that the hypothesis of
something like a Transcendent Unity is a
necessary precondition even for science
itself to find its purchase and move
forward and the fact that the University
and the scientific Enterprise
essentially emerged out of the religious
monastic tradition historically and
technically is an indication of that
fact rather than you know the kind of
post French Revolution notion that
science and religion are somehow at odds
I don't I don't I don't think that's
historically accurate and so now there's
one other thing too and I'm interested
in your comments about this see the
other reason that the proposition that
you begin with God is real is necessary
in a political sense as far as I can
tell is that there's Dawning realization
over the thousands of years of human
civilization that it's necessary even
for those who rule to be subject to some
ethical framework or power that's beyond
them so even among the ancient
Mesopotamians for example they and these
These are the oldest writings that we
have which is why I'm bringing them into
the discussion
the Mesopotamians realized that their
Emperor had to be an avatar of a god
they knew as Marduk and Marduk was the
god of attentive watching and truthful
speech and so in so far as the
Mesopotamian Emperor was an avatar of
the spirit of careful attention the
attention that updates and learns and
truthful speech he had the right to
remain as Emperor but in so far as is he
deviated from that moral path which
wasn't a characteristic of him but a
characteristic of something Transcendent
if he deviated from that he he violated
the what would you say the principles
upon which his sovereignty was
predicated and you know you have to ask
yourself how could it be other than
dangerous for anyone to inhabit a
political system where the presumption
was that the
ruler was the fundamental final source
of ethical evaluation I mean there's no
difference between that and a tyranny
obviously so so um so much in what you
said there and again it's another great
example in parallel to our climate
discussion now on this discussion about
religion one of the things I tried to do
in this book is to make that accessible
to again ordinary Americans who feel in
their who understand in their heart
probably what you said but may not have
been able to parse it exactly in the
manner that you have so let's just
separate as we did for the climate
discussion into a couple different
categories of argument here and it's
funny I actually this actually relates
directly to the opening chapter of
truths as well I'm sure your book is a
full book on it this is a shorten
version the first point about science
itself being predicated the scientific
method itself being predicated on that
Unity that's exactly right and so what
the observation I make to just make it
simpler and more convincing to lay
persons is that it is therefore not an
accident every great scientists or many
great scientists you know Albert
Einstein you go straight down the list
blae Pascal some of the people who have
made the greatest discoveries that have
improved the frontiers of scientific
understanding of the universe did indeed
believe in a single true God and I do
believe that that is something that at
least should surprise people who adopt
the postf French Revolution worldview
that say how science and religion are at
odds when some of the unambiguously
greatest scientists physicists
biologists chemists have all arrived the
conclusion that there is some greater
mover of this universe that we're
unified with and the scientific method
almost presupposes that exactly you're
going to incrementally access knowledge
that you don't have and the fact that
you're able to do that in the realm of
science is actually validating not
contradictory of the fact that you may
do the same through religious experience
so that's that's one category of
argument which is different from a
separate entirely different point which
is scientific knowledge is only one form
of knowledge right theide aidea that
truth is limited to that which you can
access through empiricism or through
empirical testing is is just a claim
that's an assertion when in fact
empirical well it's also it's also one
that's scientifically that's been
scientifically invalidated exactly in
recent years because yeah the advanced
cognitive scientists in particular the
scientists of
perception understand that we have to
prioritize our perceptions because
otherwise there's an infinite number of
potentially relevant facts and and an
infinite number is too many and so we
use a value structure to prioritize our
perception of facts and so there's no
escaping from the value problem not not
even at the level of perception it's
logically inescapable and then again in
the in the interest of sort of making
this accessible again you go to Albert
Einstein he did not deduce his theory of
relativity through empirical deduction
or through empiric even through
empirical observation he deduced it
through what you could call a form of
meditation right deep reflection on what
must be true in the universe accessing
what we now accept as truth through a
different mode than empirical deduction
which was later validated through
empirical testing that at least accounts
for our current understanding of
Relativity so a you've got the fact that
the scientific method itself relies upon
the idea of some broader Unity as you
call it B the fact that the empirical
deduction of Truth is not the only path
in fact you have almost definitive proof
that it can't be the only path to
accessing truth and good historical
examples to support that and that's all
separate from the other category that
you brought up which is the utility of
religious belief whether that's in
providing a constraint or a structure
around the sovereignty of any particular
Kingdom or Republic or whether it's even
the Fulfillment that most people are
able to experience in their own lives
and here you may actually be making a
case for even a Dawkins likee atheist I
don't know what Dawkins his own views
are but an athe aist believing that
their kids would still be better off if
their kids at least grew up being raised
in a traditional religion and believing
in God because well Dawkins has Dawkins
has described himself recently as a
cultural Christian and I think it's
exactly for those reasons exactly it's
just the utilitarian the the utility
enhancing argument for it for the same
reason that you would believe that a
republic like that of the United States
or an Old Kingdom in Mesopotamia would
be better governed if its leader were
their sovereignty were derived from but
also located within a broader
sovereignty under God and so I think
that those are four different categories
of arguments some are actually grounded
in truth others are grounded in utility
but all of which lead to as as you put
it at the beginning the desirability but
also the importance and necessity of
starting the book with that exploration
of why God is real and why that's
important when we think about wildly
successful businesses we often focus on
their great products cool branding and
Brilliant marketing but there's an
unsung hero in their success stories the
business behind the business that makes
selling simple for millions of
entrepreneurs that business is Shopify
Shopify is home to the number one
checkout on the planet and here's the
not so secret secret with shop pay they
boost conversions up to 50% that means
fewer abandoned carts and more completed
sales our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions in
today's market growth-minded businesses
need a Commerce Solution that's just as
flexible and dynamic as they are whether
your customers are browsing your website
scrolling through social media or
wandering into your store Shopify
ensures you're ready to sell ready to
elevate your business upgrade your
business today and get the same checkout
daily wire uses sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com jbp
all lowercase go to shopify.com jbp
today to upgrade your selling that's
shopify.com
sjbp let's turn if you don't mind let's
turn to chapter 2 which is that there
are two Sexes so I I want to again ask
you relatively complicated question in
that regard so one of
the Striking facts of human perception
and
conception is the Primacy of sexual
differentiation so the first thing I
would say about that is that sex
emerged about 3/4 of a billion years ago
so it's very very old phenomenon and
it's very fundamental I mean sex emerged
at least in part to ensure that
creatures could stay ahead of their
parasites and I won't go into that in
any great detail but it turns out that
sexual reproduction is more effective as
a multigenerational strategy than parth
andag Genesis because creatures could in
principle Just Produce identical copies
of themselves but that turns out not to
be biologically effective and so sex is
very fundamental now one of the things
that implies is that the ability to
differentiate sexually is also of
fundamental significance because
creatures that fail to do that don't
find a mate and so that's that on The
evolutionary side and so even creatures
that don't have a nervous system can
differentiate practically and
functionally between the Sexes but
there's more to ITC as far as I can tell
is that the notion
of sexual differentiation as a primal
fact of being I think you could make the
case that that's the most fundamental of
our perceptual categories like I think
it's more fundamental than up or down or
block and white or night and day like
and those are very fundamental
conceptualizations right and so what
that implies is that if you can
gerrymander the perception of sexual
differentiation if you can do that for
ideological reasons if you can convince
people to accept that Distortion of
reality there's no Distortion of reality
that they would be um immune to in the
aftermath of that violation
so you know I mean I mean I thought
about this very deeply since the entire
notion of the gender Spectrum has
emerged into public Consciousness and
we've seen the devastating effects of
that uh with regards to medical
malpractice for example I mean the best
data that I've been able to access now
suggests that something approximating
10,000 minor women minor girls in the
United States have had double
mastectomies that have been paid for by
insurance in the aftermath of this
gender uh that's possessed the broader
culture and I think one of the things
that the Democrats are most culpable for
and in an unforgivable manner is still
maintaining their support for this view
that gender is a spectrum and a
Continuum and you know it it's it's
interesting because of
course people do vary substantially in
their personalities
and there are masculine and feminine
personalities and they're not 100%
aligned with the underlying sexual
biology but that doesn't mean by any
stretch of the imagination that the
sexual categories are cultural
constructs are unreal in any in any deep
sense so okay well so that's I've kind
of outlined the way that I've been
perceiving that I'm curious about why
you picked that as number two in your
list of topics that need to be add
addressed and what brought this to your
attention and what you think the
problems and solutions are well after
number one and number 10 there was no
particular order to the rest other than
making for a good book so so actually
Climate Change chapter came second this
came a little bit down the line but
that's just a matter of organization in
the book it's okay it's um but but it's
it's a u it's a foundational one for
exactly the reason you lay out first of
all you want to trace the evolutionary
Heritage of gender or of sex really it's
exactly as you laid out and you could
make the case how foundational it is
relative to other foundational
attributes of of living creatures but
but it is but it is in the in the
category of foundational regardless one
of the things I explore in this chapter
is sometimes it's good to look at the
exception that you would hear on the
other side as the best argument against
your in my view and explore that because
you know people are going to encounter
that if they don't encounter it in our
own discussion they're going to
encounter it elsewhere so let's take the
phenomenon of intersex as as you're
familiar right so this would be a rare
set of of genetic anomalies chromosomal
abnormalities that result in somebody
having rather than two normally ordinar
just for everyone's benefit I'm sure
most people are aware two X chromosomes
you're a woman an X and A Y chromosome
you're a man that's the definitional
distinction for sex on a chromosomal
basis in human beings however there are
rare instances in which individuals are
born with and able to survive and live
lives approaching normal duration with x
XY XY y these run by names like Jacob
syndrome or Klein felter syndrome now
the fact that we have historically and
continue to still describe these as
syndromes and the way that we treat them
if historically even related to
classifying them as syndromes I think in
many in many ways reveals that okay the
fact that that exists and those people
deserve to be treated with dignity and
part of our societal approach for nearly
all history to treat them with dignity
is to characterize that as a syndrome in
a way that's able to be addressed
reveals exactly the point that you were
making which is that it is still
foundational the idea that we have
otherwise ordinarily evolved to have two
two X chromosomes in the united in in
the human race you're uh woman and an X
and A Y you're a man and so I think one
of the things I also explored making
this again part of the point of this
book is to make it accessible to
Ordinary People in the context of
otherwise contentious political debates
they're having you don't have let's not
accept any of the premises that you and
I have just talked about here let's not
say that you have to subscribe to that
out of the gate or you haven't studied
evolutionary biology to be convinced of
it or maybe that doesn't matter to you
it should be at least a little bit of a
mystery a little curious at the very
least that the very now umbrella
political movement and cultural movement
the lgbtqia there's many letters there
so they put a plus at the end that that
lgbtqia plus movement at once asks you
to
espouse contradictory claims on this
question so on one hand at the very
movement this umbrella movement that
told you that the sex of the person
you're attracted to is hardwired on the
day you're born and by the way that was
a central claim of the gay rights
movement and it was a central claim of
the legal argument for why gay rights
count as civil rights that it's an
immutable characteristic the very people
who said that the sex of the person
you're attracted to on the day you're
born also now require you to believe
that your own gender or even in some
constructs your biological sex is
completely fluid over the course of your
life now you can't believe both of those
things at once but it becomes even less
credible now now let's just go one layer
deeper that Paradox is even uh more
perplexing when you're asked to believe
this against the backdrop of there being
no gay gene there's no gay chromosome
but yet that's the attribute that you
have to believe is hardwired on the day
you're born or else you're a bigot and
yet the attribute for which you do have
two definitive measurable imageable
biotyping empirically discernible you
think about even the chapter of God is
real and people who hold empiricism as
even their false god fine apply that
here A A discernable empirically
observable reality and yet to say that
that's the attribute the one that is
actually totally mutable over the course
of your life while the one that had no
genetic or chromosomal basis the sex of
the person you're attracted to is the
one that somehow had to be immutable so
it becomes serially I think more and
more uh ridiculous or at least untenable
to adopt those contradictory assumptions
at once to say that maybe you could
believe one of those things or you could
believe the other of those things but
the postmodern demand is that you
believe both of those things at once
which is something that even for
somebody who isn't you know maybe as
drawn to the underlying biological or
evolutionary historical truth could at
least acknowledge the hypocrisy of that
for the purpose of civil dinner table
conversation which again is is part of
the purpose of my book to make some of
these Concepts a little bit more
accessible I I think it points to the
fact that the argument isn't the issue
like the issue as far as I can tell is
something
like let's walk through it a little bit
and see if we can formulate it's
something like the presumption that I am
going to Jerry maner my perceptual and
cognitive
categories such that at any given moment
I have maximal freedom to pursue
whatever form of gratification sexual
and otherwise that might come to mind
and so if that's my goal and I think
that is the goal of the hedonistic left
is to justify that that attitude of
pleasure immediate pleasure seeking at
the EXP ense of everything else then The
Logical contradictions don't matter and
so if that means sometimes assuming that
everything is radically socially
constructed so that any constraint
placed upon me is just an arbitrary
manifestation of the tyrannical
patriarchy well then I'll accept that
when it suits my desire to e explore my
hedonistic uh proclivities and if it
means in other circumstances that I have
to accept the idea of immutability with
regards to sexual attraction I'll also
do that happily because the real game
here is I think what's increasingly on
display in the pride parades which is
not so much a celebration of the freedom
to love which is you know what the
Democratic good thinkers insist upon but
the freedom to pursue any form of
gratification whatsoever free from any
possible constraints of of like future
or future or social orientation I mean
that's what explains the willingness I
think to swallow these contradictions
because they are they aren't
contradictory at that deeper level if
your desire is that your desires are
gratified immediately regardless of any
other consideration then there is no
contradiction at that level of analysis
and and and and so if we're to then
connect to Common Thread through all
three of the topics we've discussed so
far and we're going through you no
particular order in the different
chapters of of my book and so be it but
let's just connect these three right
we've talked about climate we've talked
about religion the the claim that God is
real and now this notion our our
conviction and the truth that there are
two genders based on two
Sexes I think a Common Thread exists
there where your point is logic was
never really the point or argument was
never really going to be the mode of
persuasion in the first place what are
these new this new climate change agenda
and the lgbtqia agenda what's really at
the heart of it is they really do have
the characteristics of actually to bring
in Full Circle modern religions right
and so when you stop believing in the
real thing you're going to believe in
alternative religions instead or the
idea of Hedonism as an end in itself
like that is that is the ultimate false
idol or the false God whether you
believe that if if there isn't some sort
of other controlling and constraining
demand on how human beings are supposed
to behave through a moral order and
andow Upon Us by God then you will
believe in a different constraining
principle and doubt on you know impose
our human beings by the climate so I do
think that that goes to this native
human need for belief in higher purpose
belief and meaning belief probably
something well it's probably something
like the um irresistible force of I of a
of the Quest for a unifying hypo
hypothesis yes right I mean we we could
make that you know you're your the case
you laid out and I think this is is
genuine is that there's no Escape From A
belief structure that's right because
and that's partly imagine that that's
partly because you have to conceptualize
your beliefs in relationship to one
another and you have to do that in
something resembling a hierarchical
manner because some things you believe
have to be primary compared to other
things that you believe you know like
you value your wife more than some
random woman on the street for example
which indicates a priority of value now
you can debate whether or not you should
do that but you can't debate that you do
do that so let's say that people are
driven by necessity to organize their
beliefs coherently and hierarchically
and that implies that there's going to
be competitions between different
hierarchies of belief but that there's
no escape from the necessity of a
hierarchy of belief partly because in
the absence of such a hierarchy you're
just confused and aimless which is very
uncomfortable and distressing
psychologically and also very
impractical and so then the question
becomes well what are going to what are
the foundations going to be of that
hierarchical belief and you're pointing
to something like allegiance to a
transcendental unity in a CL in the
classic sense that's associated with say
with with with uh with the mainstreams
of religious thought that characterize
mankind the and what seems to happen is
that in the absence of that Alternatives
emerge that are pathological and one
would be the worship of power and you
certainly see that with the postmodern
worship of power because people like
Fuko he's the best example of this and
certainly it was characteristic of Marx
make the presumption that power is the
fundamental motivator and it is a
unifying force of although it's
pathological in the extreme in my
estimation but you also see in classic
accounts the proclivity for people to
degenerate in a hedonistic Direction
when they lose their moral guidance and
so for example in the story of
Moses uh The Exodus story when Moses
departs from the Lost Israelites to go
to receive the Ten Commandments they're
left under the control of Aaron and
Aaron is moses' political wing
and so you could think of him as someone
who's only beholden to the whims of the
people so he's like a he's a populist
that's another way of thinking about it
so the transcendental guide disappears
and all that's left is the populist
representative of the people and what
happens in The Exodus story is that the
Israelites immediately degenerate into
worship of the golden calf which is
something like orgastic materialism
because they end up dancing naked in an
orgastic manner in a drunken orgastic
Manner and worshiping something like the
golden calf which is a symbol of
material wealth and so one of the
implications there is that in the
absence of a Transcendent orientation
the populist proclivity is going to be
uh the demand for the gratification of
immediate of immediate desire and of
course that makes a certain amount of
sense right because obviously we're
motivated to
requite our immediate desires you have
to have a reason not to do that that's a
higher reason right just like you have
to have a reason to mature or you have
to have a reason to forego gratification
so of course that's how a society would
degenerate and I would say also the
reason it tends to degenerate in the
direction of power which is somewhat
different than Hedonism is that the
purpose of power is the gratification of
hedonistic desire right because if I
want to gratify myself and I have power
I can force you to comply and you can
become an agent of my whims and so
that's where you get that dance between
the hedonists and the tyrants and so
those those are the cataclysmic forces
that beckon and destabilize in the
absence of something like an upward
oriented
transcendental uh what transcendental
subjugation that's how it looks to me
anyways so and that seems to be akin to
the argument that you're making at least
implicitly yes in at least those
chapters of your book and and if I may
if I may just to just to sort of bridge
this to actually it actually is a
perfect uh bridge to much of the rest of
the book is that yes you can't escape
belief that is a Common Thread through
the book me the book is called truths
this isn't a truth that is a chapter of
its own but it's a Common Thread through
the entire rest of them which is that
you can't escape a belief or belie you
can't escape belief or a belief
structure and so whether we're talking
about lgbtqia ISM or racial wokeism
that's a chapter that we cover in the
book as well or the climatism you can't
escape belief so I start with the big
one right God is real that's an
alternative belief structure which is
grounded I believe in truth but also
even from a from a self-fulfillment
perspective provides you at least
greater fulfillment than these other
false Idols the other these other golden
calf
substitutes but but that may be
difficult for for some people who are
especially those who may not be so
inclined or you know you have to be
under a certain condition or a certain
state of mind and being to be able to
open your mind to the possibility of
believing in God if you previously
didn't and that's not something you're
going to I don't think through a book
persuade someone into anyway so one of
the things I offer in the book is
Alternatives right maybe you're not
going to fill the whole vacuum in your
heart or the whole vacuum of belief that
you require that's otherwise filled by
climatism cism wokeism and
transgenderism with you know the
following maybe God is the most
important one but absent that there are
there are other proxies proxies maybe
the wrong word but other substitutes and
so this relates to some of the other
chapters that I cited to the nuclear
family is the greatest form of
governance known to mankind that in some
ways is at least a belief in a structure
a belief in the importance of family a
belief in a grounding conviction of your
identity this chapter on nationalism
isn't a bad word that's at the heart of
it is that a civic identity or national
identity can also provide that sense of
belief that is necessary anyway but you
may as well ground it in something that
is a true but be also is more time-
tested in what is able to provide a
human being with his sense of
fulfillment and purpose and so in some
sense that is better than I probably
conceptualized if I was to rewrite the
introduction to my book after this
conversation it might actually be a
better introduction so I wish we had
talked earlier but that is exactly what
the book evinces through this through
these
chapters in these turbulent times the
Holy Land faces daily threats Rockets
rain down conflict persists and innocent
lives hang in the balance but amidst the
chaos there is a Beacon of Hope the
International Fellowship of Christians
and Jews for over four decades they've
been Israel's unwavering Ally providing
more than just Aid they're offering a
Lifeline picture this a bomb shelter
strategically placed in a vulnerable
neighborhood offering Refuge from
incoming Rockets a bullet proof
ambulance sirens wailing as it races to
save lives a warm nourishing meal
delivered to the elderly the fellowship
is on the front lines combating both
physical threats and the alarming surge
of global anti-Semitism they're showing
up day after day in the most dangerous
and neglected areas proving that love
and compassion no no borders and as
anti-Semitism rears its ugly head
worldwide your contribution is a
powerful statement of solidarity with
the people of Israel it's a way to reach
across the globe extend a helping hand
and make a tangible impact now you have
the unique opportunity to join this
vital mission for just $45 less than the
cost of a night out you can provide an
emergency food box containing critical
Essentials for vulnerable Israelis
trapped in bomb shelters to give to the
fellowship visit Jordan forthe
fellowship.org again that's Jordan
forthe fellowship.org
well so let me outline something else
from Exodus that's extremely interesting
in that regard so um there's a there's a
a time when the Israelites are lost and
wandering when they set up Moses as a
judge and so they are fractious and
squabbling because they don't have the
capacity for self-governance being
recently freed slaves who were now lost
in this expansive chaotic Wasteland
right this post
tyrannical domain of confusion which is
what the desert signifies and so they
really try to make Moses into a new
pharaoh and so they set him up as judge
and so they bring all the disputes they
can't um reconcile themselves to his
attention and ask him to rule and Moses
father-in-law comes along a man named
Jethro re-enters the picture he's a good
man a good Foreigner and he says to
Moses you have to stop doing this
because you're going to be reestablished
as a new pharaoh and so you'll have all
the problems of the previous Tyrant but
also
by depriving your people of the
necessity of adjudicating their own
disputes you infantilize them and
they'll stay as
slaves and so that's a very interesting
and cogent critique and so
what Jethro tells Moses to do this is
very cre a
key uh what would you call it occurrence
in the history of political thought
because the the issue that's being
addressed in a very compact form is
what's the alternative to the Tyrant and
the
slave right you could think about those
as extreme forms of of social
organization tight organization under a
single power and no organization
whatsoever and what Jethro tells Moses
to do is to divide his people into
groups and make a hierarchy so put
everybody in groups of 10 have those 10
elect a leader um from amongst
themselves then to make a group out of
those leaders and then to take the
leader leaders and make another Pinnacle
above them and to do all the way up do
that all the way up to groups of
10,000 and then to adjudicate the
disputes from the bottom up letting only
those that can't be adjudicated at a
lower level get to Moses so it's it's
the construction of a hierarchy that's
called the principle of
subsidiarity and so it's the formulation
of a subsidiary hierarchy of
responsibility and identity that's the
alternative to the slave and the Tyrant
and you're touching on that in your
formulation this is something we've been
dealing with forly at this uh Alliance
for responsible citizenship organization
that's an attempt to bring conservatives
and classic liberals together all around
the world and so you know you're
highlighting certain elements of those
that subsidiary ident
which is not only a belief right it's a
mode of being in the world like to have
a family isn't only to believe that a
family is valuable it's also to have a
family right and to be nested in that
and one of the points that you're making
that you appear to be making is that
well if you're looking for an
identity father sibling son in a
well-structured nuclear family actually
provides that right it's it's who you
are it's shapes the way you see the
world and it it offers you a set of
meaningful responsibilities but it's not
only the nuclear family right it's the
town it's the city it's the state it's
the nation and so there's a place for
the nation as well you you know the
problem with the globalist view which is
that it's
disenfranchised hyper
individualistic um autonomous
individuals bereft of any social
structuring is that you end up with the
slave Tyrant problem immediately is that
when you eradicate all the subsidiary
structures from people's identity you
turn them into slaves and you turn the
ruler into a tyrant and that's the
danger of organizations like the WF or
the UN or the EU for that matter right
that push
this this identity that's too extreme
there's no intermediary social
institutions there's only individuals
and the the king the Pharaoh the Tyrant
and then you end up with this slave
Tyrant dichotomy and everyone is lost
and aimless and without identity and so
you are I think your point that what
you're doing with these intermediary
structures nuclear family a
constitutional republic um and a
national identity is flesh it's not so
much a substitute for the orientation
towards the the Divine it's the fleshing
out of what that would mean yes
practically in how you constitute
yourself as an individual this is what
the conservatives have to offer in part
right because the atomized Liberals tend
to think of everybody as only individual
but when you start to understand that
your identity is also that of the
nuclear family and also that of the
nation let's say in the state then that
gives you a place and a set of tasks Stu
undertake that that are nested
underneath the Transcendent but
also meaningful manifestations of
identity that's exactly right and so
this is the heart of really what the
book is about when I talk about truths
this is the this is the heart of a truth
that permeates all of the other ones so
you used a couple so many interesting
things what you said there you used the
word subsidiarity you can use the word
constitute as it relates to individual
so I'm going to I'll I'll pick up on
that verbal cue to to cite something
else different but relates to the same
verbal cue which is Jeth and Moses that
principle of subsidiarity of
organization is what many scholars have
at least tied and even attributed in
some cases to article 4 section 4 of the
US Constitution and where it actually
Finds Its Own Roots is actually none
other than that through that principle
of subsidiarity that Jethro imparted to
Moses both in the system of federal ISM
also in the system of how our own
district courts to appellant courts to
the Supreme Court is actually set up in
the United States and so whether as a as
a historical parallel or even for
certain people who participate in the
Constitutional Convention whether they
had in mind actually Jetro and Mo's
structure there of subsidiarity it's
actually deeply woven into the fabric
and founding of the United States so
people often will say we're founded on
judeo-christian values and that's what
our constitution was written in the
backdrop of people say these things but
with without actually necessarily
understanding some of those deeper
linkages details exactly and that's
that's one of the things I I also
explore in this book now on this
principle of of subsidiarity look I
think that I think that there is also an
opportunity for and and our our goals in
our respective books here maybe slightly
different and mine is different here
from even some of my prior books my goal
here is actually very pragmatic right in
that even for those who may not get
there on God or on Nation they could at
least get there on family right the idea
that you were a brother a father a
husband and then that grounds you great
the nuclear family is I I make here the
greatest form of governance certainly
greater than than a
government and then maybe you get there
on family then you can go a little bit
further that I'm a citizen of this
nation not any other Nation not some
nebulous Global citizen fighting climate
change nebulously somewhere and I so I
export climate in the same book but I'm
a citizen of this nation in my my case
the United States of America that means
something here's what that means here's
what that Civic ideal is really based on
and my pride in that national identity
if you call that a form of nationalism
that need not be a bad word so so maybe
we get there with that and then look you
have a vacuum in your heart have you
filled the whole thing with your family
identity and your national identity
maybe not but if you've even partially
filled the cup you're diluting a lot of
the poison that otherwise filled it to
irrelevance and that itself is partial
progress even if we don't make it all
the way to people who I may not we over
with the single chapter dedicated to God
is real okay maybe we do win some people
over with that but even if we don't I
want to leave room it's very practical
project for partial victories along the
way and I think that in some ways um
that that's one of two mistakes I'd like
to identify I think in the conservative
movement is we haven't given ourselves
or maybe not ourselves but our fellow
citizens the space for those partial
victories and and I think the more we
provide the space for those partial wins
the more likely we are to eventually
progress to what a fuller Victory looks
like the other issue I see with the
conservative movement is here we often
are very good at identifying and
lambasting the poison that fills the cup
right the the alternative belief
structures that we
adopt but I think without certainly
amongst conservative political
leadership in in recent years I would
say this probably for the better part of
the 21st century we're not good enough
at identifying what the
alternative beliefs are that we alter
division is that we actually subscribe
to so we know what we're against but
what exactly do we stand for so we talk
we spend a lot of our air time if you
just look at I don't know conservative
media right and you look at race gender
sexuality and climate how much time do
we spend talking about those topics
versus talking about the value inherent
value of each individual the inherent
value of the family the nation and God
and I think that there's a vast
disparity where we actually are doing
far less to defeat the ideologies or
dogmas of race gender sexuality and
climate by confronting them directly
then we might by actually Reviving
individual family nation and God that's
not to say that there isn't a time in
place for directly confronting a threat
and and fighting it headon I think that
there's there's a time and place for
that and I think that that's necessary
at times but it is not the way in which
we're going to restore the kind of order
we miss in postmodern America or the
postmodern West I think that that will
require doing the harder work of saying
it's not just what we're against but
what do we actually affirmatively stand
for and I see that as missing when I
think about the future of America first
one of the hard truths that permeates
the book as well is that is an abject
failure of the modern Republican party I
think it is a damning indictment of the
modern conservative movement
and I hope what I do through this book
is pave a path for what that future
conservative movement can be resurrected
to actually accomplish yeah well that's
very much Akin as I said to what we're
trying to do with this Arc organization
and for for exactly the same reasons is
that you know the conservatives are
frequently criticized for being
reactionary uh to for for their
objections let's say to the Visionary
proclivity of the left but have been
remiss um repeatedly in defending and
fleshing out an alternative vision and
as you said it's become time for the
obvious to be restated I mean one of the
constant criticisms of my work um
writing and and lecturing for that
matter is that you know while Peterson
does nothing but State and explain the
obvious but it is the case that in times
of Crisis it is precisely the role of
conservatives to make a case for what is
so deeply rooted in people's psyches
that it's foundational and to defend
that that's exactly what conservatives
do that is their role and so um
Visionary conservatives shine a light on
the true pathway forward that's grounded
in the appropriate guiding traditions of
the past and it certainly looks like
that's what you're doing in this book
let me turn our attention in the time we
have left over to to something that's
more well more political and more
personal at the the same time now you
spent a lot of time on your presidential
campaign which was quite successful All
Things Considered given how relatively
unknown you were as a political actor
and and uh the complexities of the
current political situation and I'm very
curious about
the consequences of that I mean I did
note that you know there was a fair
amount of um I'm wondering what your
relationship is with the powers that be
on the Republican side at the moment I
mean we've seen Trump make some
remarkably interesting moves in the past
few weeks I mean the fact that he's
aligned himself with telsey gabard and
RFK and by all appearances Elon Musk who
agreed yesterday to head something like
a commission on um governmental
efficiency which would be I mean this is
the radicalness of this can hardly be
overstated right I mean RFK wants
to what he wants to rekindle the or
reformulate the health and Food
Distribution Systems like I mean that's
a major undertaking and I think he's
absolutely right about the Health crisis
that besets us I mean obesity and
diabetes are a plague of such
catastrophic proportions that they make
any risk from climate change appear like
absolutely trivial by by comparison in
inanely trivial but it's radical and
while ELO musk is a radical sort of
character and telsey gabard again she
she fits the same she she what she's
subject to the same descriptive
terminology and it's also interesting
that all three of those people are ex
Democrats right you could also say about
Trump you know it's not like Trump is
the world's most obvious conservative
quite the contrary so I'm I'm curious
about what you make of what's happening
around Trump at the moment and of around
camela Harris too for that matter
because there's also evidence that her
stance has become substantially less
radical and more conservative now you
can be skeptical and cynical and maybe
you should be about how much of that's
just surfaced but the Democrats did shut
out the radical leftists at the
convention to a large degree and much of
what Harris has been pushing is much
more mainstream Democrat than what you
might have expected for example if the
people like AOC or Rashida flame had got
the upper hand the real the real
radicals in the Democratic in the
Democratic party
so what do you make of what's happening
around Trump how do you feel about it
what potential role are you playing and
might you play in the future in
relationship to that and what do you
what do you have to say about what's
happening with camela Harris and the
reconfiguration of the Democrats well
look everything you just laid out I
think accentuates an increasingly
obvious truth which is that the real
divide in this country is not between
the Republican party and the Democrat
Party as those words have become less
meaningful you have multiple former
Democrats who you named Elon Musk tulsey
gabard RFK and by the way somebody who
formerly identifi as Democrat as well as
Donald Trump now you know now looking at
the world in a very different way
on the other hand you have KLA Harris in
her in her Sprint it's not even a
gradual run it's a Sprint towards the
center of traditional political content
I think what's what we're actually
seeing is is a different divide it is a
divide between the managerial class and
the everyday citizen so I'll start with
kamla for a second here I don't think
the right spoton critique of kamla is
that she's a communist right the
policies she's advocated for in the past
certainly would vindicate that
characterization she favors taxes on
unrealized capital gains single-payer
healthc care system she has favored bans
on fracking bans on offshore drilling
she was a co-sponsor of the green New
Deal so much so that she wanted to end
the filibuster in sen we go to straight
down the list of that history and I've
done that in other places but as you say
right now sincerely or not those are not
the views that she's espousing at the
moment for the most part so it's it's
less that she is a communist or a
socialist I think that's almost giving
her too much credit I think that that
gives her the credit of being an ideal
OG which I don't think she is I don't
think she's particularly ideological I
think she like Biden as Biden proved to
be anyway is really just another Cog in
a machine right I think that this is
part of I think the more Republicans see
ourselves running against a candidate
and it say that that candidate Joe Biden
you know when I ran for US president
right the The Pledge we had to signed to
be on the debate stage was called the
beat Biden pledge and I told the then
chairwoman of the Republican party I
thought this was a silly idea because
we're not running against Joe Biden so
why are we framing our entire Republican
primary Endeavor in the context of
beating Joe Biden in the very practical
sense that I didn't think we're going to
run against Joe Biden we're not but even
in the deeper philosophical sense that
why don't we focus on what other
alternative Vision we actually have to
offer to the people so I think that's a
trap that Republicans would fall into
now again with kamla to say that okay
here's everything that's wrong with
kamla Harris when in fact that misses
the point that she's just another Cog in
the system we're not running against a
candidate we're running against a
machine and I think we have to
understand that so that is where I think
you see a lot of the common threads
between
folks like you know myself to RFK to
Donald Trump to Tulsi we have
divergences between us to other more uh
historically traditional Republican
conservatives there'll be shades of
difference on individual policy
questions on the merits of one form of
of you know regulation or policymaking
or
other but what we do represent in Sharon
cman is a hostility to the managerial
class the
managerial administration of America by
by I would say people who are never
elected to their positions the people
who we elect to run the government from
KL Harris to Joe Biden or who anybody
else they're not the ones actually
running the government it is a
managerial machine of which they're just
a part that really is the divide and I
think that's what we're seeing in that
changing land it's also strange it's so
strange that it's the conservative
Republicans that have found themselves
in opposition to the managerial class
because logically it should be that the
conservatives are the support ERS of the
managerial and administrative class I
there been points in history where
that's been true no doubt about it but I
think that I think that that's where you
know the word these words change their
veence and meaning over time yeah yeah
right you know the managerial class I
don't use the term the elites really as
much as some of my other friends in the
right do because I think that I'm an
elite Elon Musk is an elite you know by
any by certain definitions Founders I
think there's a different categorization
I would offer between the everyday
citizen the Creator
and then this managerial intermediary
class the bureaucrat class the committee
class and I think there's always a
balance of power between all three and
maybe some element of all three is
always required in a well functioning
Society but right now we live in a
moment where that balance of power has
shifted too heavily in favor of the
managerial committee class and not just
in government but in universities and
companies in nonprofits in any
institution and I think now is a moment
we live in where creators are able to
Ally with everyday citizens to be able
to drive real change change and so
that's you I'm a Creator by background
that's what led me to run for US
president Donald Trump Elon Musk very
similar backgrounds as creators who are
allied with the everyday citizen to
overthrow in some sense the managerial
class that has a lot of our modern
culture and certainly our modern
government in a Chokehold and so that's
what motivated me to run in the first
place I think it's it's a Common Thread
that you could connect for some of the
other characters you just mentioned and
you know for my part look I've I've
enjoyed I enjoyed my presidential run
immensely I I was the experience of a
lifetime I grew in ways that I would not
have but for doing that one thing I uh
do believe in in you know for all the
things that I could blame for why I
didn't achieve the ultimate goal I'm
grateful that I as somebody who was
relatively unknown at the start of it I
beat multiple former and current
senators and governors and a former vice
president along the way and so I'm
satisfied with how we did but at the
same time I I didn't achieve the goal of
assuming the presidency and I tell my
kids the same thing so I'll follow the
advice myself the number one factor that
is most determinative of what you
achieve in life is you it's not the only
factor that matters but it's the number
one factor and there are some things
that I think I could have done better I
think a lot of my uh former colleagues
people I've worked with employees of
mine close friends family members I
think one of the things that they were
most frustrated by they tell me me this
and I appreciate that is that they're
frustrated that they feel like the
public did not get to see the full me
that they know right I think that part
of what happened in the process of
running for president and it was
unavoidable this time around and I don't
say I have any regrets considering the
result that I achieved but you know if I
was to still take some Reflections and
learning from it I took the approach
that if you hit me I'm going to hit you
back 10 times harder I don't care if
you're a Republican or
Democrat that's just that was just my
Approach and because I had been in a
position where in the world of business
it doesn't happen to you in quite the
same way but when I started to become
ascendant it was a level of uh attack
right a deeply personal attack on me
from 10 different angles that that was
the way I dealt with it was to say well
I will one by one hit you back 10 times
harder and that's how I'm going to do
this and and that that is that is part
of me I'm a fighter I'm a competitor but
it's not all of me and I think that one
of the challenges but if you're going to
lead the Free World you better be up for
that challenge it at the highest level
is to show the people that you are a
fighter but while also finding ways to
really allow 300 million people who
don't otherwise know you to really get
to know what's in your heart beyond just
your ability to fight and that is I
think where I left some some room on the
table over the campaign that I think is
you know probably one of my great
learnings okay well you alluded to the
fact that you learned a lot
well as you should have well undertaking
this endeavor and the overall effect of
that Still Remains to be determined
because you're a young man and God only
knows what's open to you in the future
but well in in terms of growth on the
wisdom side you you you just you know
you alluded to the fact that you feel
that you might have been too combative
you know I've noticed this with the new
leader of the conservative party in
Canada Pierre POV and he's in all
likelihood going to be the next prime
minister he's cataclysmically far ahead
in the polls at the moment and it looks
like Trudeau and his minions and the
Socialists along with them are going to
be devastated in Canada when the next
election emerges now POV is a scrappy
guy he's not particularly agreeable um
in the temperamental sense he's more of
a competitor and a fighter and that
served him very well as a member of the
opposition when his fundamental goal was
the criticism let's say of the of the
Trudeau government or lack thereof but
when he transformed into the leader of
the conservative party and now the
putative prime minister his role has to
shift right he has to become more of a
Statesman he has to be less impulsive
and reactive now I mean it's a tricky
thing to manage right because you know
you had to demonstrate that you could
fight back and land your own blows you
know and I I saw that you were quite
effective at that for example at the
convention speeches and and and publicly
so what do you think you learned in
terms of maturity let's say how did you
learn to regulate your proclivity to be
Scrappy and and how do you see your book
let's say like your book seems to be a
manifestation of that desire to rather
than react to provide something more
closely approximating a well-developed
vision so walk us through how you think
you've changed I'm I'm particularly
interested in changes that would be
indicative of an expanded maturity
because you know you went through quite
the mill and a series of very what deep
challenges and complex situations that
you had to negotiate and so I'm very
curious about how you think this has
changed you and and maybe for the better
and even possibly for the worst because
it's also not that straightforward to
withstand all those slings and arrows
for example without um you know that
having some potentially detrimental
effect on your yeah what would you say
it's easy to become resentful for
example it could be is it is I I think
I've gone through I think I've gone
through a few faces of that but I think
I think with the benefit of some
distance I think I have greater greater
Clarity so I I actually the first thing
I would say is I I'm not sure that even
if I was to go back in time to January
2023 and go through the whole thing
again that I in the situation I was in
would do it too much differently than I
did in a certain sense it it kind of had
to be the way it was it's just the way
that things were ordered because let's
say I had started with I mean I I I I I
do have a different vision for what the
future of the conservative movement
ought to be the future of the country
ought to be it's an alternative Vision
not a reactionary one that's what I
started with last year but if I just
remained in that territory as a guy
who's unknown coming from nowhere in a
media landscape reaching 330 million
people it would have gone nowhere I
would have never even been on that
debate stage in the first place and I
think people do want someone in the
commander-in-chief role and require it's
part of why Donald Trump got there the
first time and is back there again now
who can level with the fire with
fighting fire with fire but I think you
got to it's an and so it's not so much
that my lesson is that it would be to Le
less pugnacious with necessary I think
you got to have that in the Arsenal at
to the fullest extent possible so it's
not taking that 10 on a scale of 10 and
dialing that back to a six but I think
it is to make sure that I'm using my my
full arsenal of modes that we are going
to require to both fight evil fight
wrong where we confront it but also to
find Grace and to deliver Unity where we
require it too and so I think that it is
I think that was I think my big bigger
learning is the ability to and I have it
in my heart and I when I've led a
company I found that to be much easier
to do it's a much easier task by
comparison to running for US president
and leading a nation but one of the
things I learned is in that in in this
context too it's just as important in
the same way that when you would lead a
company in a group of people there are
times you got to be tough there are
times you have to be empathic there are
times you have to be understanding there
are times you have to be revisit your
own most closely held assumptions for
the betterment of the company as a whole
I think it it would be actually taking
some of those lessons and transposing
those in the way that I would run a
campaign and lead a country is it's not
just the fighter mode but you're going
to have to bring out some of other modes
as well and so that's that's I think one
big one big Lear well you seem to be
doing that with the book right no way
writing was and just the benefit of
distance and reflection and you know
writing and yes I think this book was an
important part of my journey as well to
Marshall those lessons for whatever that
next step is and tactically there's a
few next steps for me and I'm not uh you
know one of things I've learned in my
life is if you plot out your own career
path or your own next steps with a very
inward-looking attitude to yourself it
never goes according to your plan anyway
for for me it certainly hasn't but at
the moments where I've been called by a
true purpose and guided by a true
purpose the plan I have confidence will
reveal itself it it always has and you
know I think very practically you talk
about learnings from the last year some
of this is you know not philosophical
some of this is very practical here are
some things I actually would have done
differently heading into the first
debate I would have taken two weeks off
actually I was in nine states in the
seven days leading up to the first
presidential debate in retrospect that
was crazy first of all I was speaking
very fluidly 247 for those days in nine
different states which provided a lot of
fodder for you know free freewheeling
quotes that I'm delivering to be
airlifted on the debate stage in ways
that you know was just tactically
probably not a good position to put
myself in but I think even just in terms
of my own
mental and spiritual Readiness to enter
that next phase of the campaign I didn't
take enough enough moments to reconnect
myself with the original purpose in just
the day-to-day of going 247 that almost
fed the competitive Spirit you're driven
by momentum you're driven by speed
that's consistent with okay you hit me
back I'm gonna hit you back 10 times
harder all of that went together versus
yes I need to be able to turn that mode
on when I when we need to to fight for
the right cause but I think that even
very tactically if I had taken a couple
up to a couple hours a day that's a lot
I didn't do this but a couple hours a
day of free form writing reflection
meditation you know I did spend a lot of
time with my family but it was still in
the context of what felt like a
whirlwind but instead actually
disconnected time with my family I think
the combination of those things and even
taking longer stretches than just two
hours in a day but even a week or two
before an important inflection point
like a first presidential debate to be
able to allow 300 million people to see
who you really are in full right right
right so that would have enabled you to
to as you said to reconnect with the
fundamental orienting principles that
had impelled yeah yeah yeah I see I see
all right so I think we'll bring this
section of our disc discussion to a
close for everybody that's watching and
listening going to speak with V for at
least another 20 minutes on the daily
wire side and I think what we'll do
there is twofold and we're going to
continue our conversation about um the
about vix analysis of the of Trump's
current situation especially in
relationship to the people that have
come to his side let's say in the last
couple of weeks but I also want to talk
to Vi about his thoughts about his role
in the conservative movement
theoretically and
practically in the months and years that
are ahead of us and so if all of you who
are watching and listening or some of
you want to join us on the daily wire
side that's what we're going to do and
so V thank you very much for talking to
me while all the multiple times that you
have um just a recap here we discussed a
lot of today we discussed your book
truths coming out September 24th the
future of America first and so um that
was very very enlightening and I can see
you elaborating this vision and and
seeing you lay the groundwork for for
the future in exactly that manner so
that's very cool thing to see and thank
you as well for walking us through your
experiences on the campaign Trail and
well because you did that a number of
times on the podcast which was extremely
interesting and it's nice to get this
kind of closure and so I want to thank
you for all that on my behalf and on
behalf of my listeners and then um well
we'll continue our discussion on The
Daily wire side thank you very much sir
and to everybody watching and listening
thank you for your time and attention
thank you
[Music]